# My Favorite Papers in Modern Bandit Theory

[Multi-armed bandit problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-armed_bandit) has been one of the focal points of statistical research since World War II. In the beginning, the problem was considered to be extremely difficult. Peter Whittle states this difficulty as follows: "_...efforts to solve it so sapped the energies and minds of Allied analysts that the suggestion was made that the problem be dropped over Germany, as the ultimate instrument of intellectual sabotage_". The classical (stochastic) version bandit problem was eventually solved by some of the greatest mathematicians of the 20th century (i.e., Gittins, Lai and Robbins). However, these answers did not resolve the questions regarding the exploration-exploitation tradeoff. On the contrary, the initial success in explaining the dynamics of exploration-exploitation tradeoff raised a plethora of new questions. Here, I will list my favorite papers in bandit theory.   

## [Finite-Time Analysis of the Multi-Armed Bandit Problem -- Auer et al.](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1023/A:1013689704352)

In their seminal paper, Lai and Robbins proposed the UCB (Upper Confidence Bound) Algorithm, and showed that the pseudo-regret grows at a rate O(log(N)) where N is the time-horizon. By using the famous information geometric lower bound, they showed that this growth order is optimal. The results in Lai and Robbins's paper are asymptotic in N, i.e., the order-optimality is achieved as the time-horizon goes to infinity. In this paper, the authors develop the now-standard finite-time analysis technique to show that the regret is logarithmic with a small constant additive term for all N. Thanks to the analysis techniques developed in this paper, UCB-type algorithms became the standard in bandit theory.

## [Gaussian Process Optimization in the Bandit Setting: No Regret and Experimental Design - Srinivas et al.](https://arxiv.org/abs/0912.3995)

The classical bandit theory is interested in finitely many arms. When the action space is continuous, things become complicated as a result of the decreased separability between the optimal arm and its suboptimal neighbors. At this point, the notion of **information structure** comes to our help. If the function to be learned satisfies certain smoothness properties, sublinear regret can be possible. One way to impose these smoothness properties is Lipschitz continuity, which is considered in a variety of papers. This paper by Srinivas takes a different (Bayesian) approach, and models the unknown function to be learned as an instance of a Gaussian process. By following this approach, the smoothness of the unknown function is encoded via a kernel_ function, and the posterior update is performed via simple operations. I personally like the notion of _information gain_ introduced in this paper: in decision-making, the information content of an action is considered besides its immediate reward.
